Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
Tellerik create compelling app experiences
across any screen with the
Tellerik platform Telerx end to
end platform. Uniquely combines industry
leading UI tools with cloud
services to simplify the entire
app development cycle Tellerik offers
everything.net developers need to build
quality apps faster. Try it
free at tellerik.com/platform that's tellerik.com/platform
from hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
all weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number four 39. In this
episode, Scott talks with Tom
Sodestrom from JPL about space
and the next it decade.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes, and I have
the pleasure of chatting with
Tom Soderstrom. He is the
chief technology innovation officer at
JPL or division of NASA.
How are you, sir? Very
well. Thank you, Scott. What
is it like having a
nasa.gov email address? Is that
just the best? It is
fun. I mean, it's, it's
an amazing institution to be
part of. And of course
I'm with the jet propulsion
laboratory, which is associated with
NASA. So how does that
work? It's associated with NASA.
It's not a division, but
you guys are so, so
friends, you're a subdomain of
NASA. I know that much.
Yes. So we are a
federally funded research center. So
it's a Caltech contract to
NASA that runs JPL. We're
also a NASA center. We
have 30 spacecraft and instruments
operating across the universe, at
least our solar system. And
we are, we also do
some non-governmental work. So we
get around. Is it hard
to tell where NASA ends
and JPL begins? Now? We're
very, very good part where
NASA center. I see. So
the NASA work is for
NASA and it's extremely exciting.
Yeah, it is amazing. You,
you, you've got some amazing
stuff to talk about and
the way that NASA, as
a, as a consumer of
NASA products, I like to
think about that as myself
has changed, it feels like
over the last five to
six years, I'm seeing open
shores coming out of NASA.
We're seeing more images, more
data you're, we're drowning in
NASA data. When it seems
a little bit more secretive,
10, 15 years ago, I
think that's a really good
common Scott. And I'm glad
that you're seeing that this
openness and participation is a
really big deal for us.
So JPL, we're doing our
part and of course, NASA
is doing their part, but
it's all about getting citizens,
the value for their buck.
And it's about extending humanity
and discovering where life came
from and all of those,
it sounds like platitudes, but
it's much more than that.
It's, it's an Amazing place
to work and I'm happy
to go over some details
as we move on. Yeah.
Please like when you're in
a meeting with bosses and
you're your boss yourself, are
you saying in those closed
door meetings, how can we
get this information to the
people in a way that
is digestible? Or how can
we put this on the
website? Yes, we do that.
And we also think, how
can we, of course do
things better. What people may
not realize is we use
the same tools that all
you do, programmers. We use
iPhones, we use Androids, we
use Microsoft, all the mobile
devices and we use servers.
So it's the same technology
that we use on the
ground. Then the space, it's
a little different. We have
different challenges of radiation and
things like that. Jim renaly
my boss at JPL is
a CIO. We often talked
about if we had no
legacy, what would we do
differently? So think like a
startup. And so we've started
to do that. And so
it's reaching people, but it's
also, how do we do
our business better? And how
do we attract the next
generation of explorers to come
and work at JPL and
NASA? That's so interesting. Like
I can intellectualize that. You're
saying that you use the
same tools that we're using,
but it seems like it's
such a venerable institution and
that the people that JPL
would be just using some
magic parallel technology that is
that we, that we, that
the small people don't have
access to, But you don't
know, not at all. And
I think the magic of
JPL and NASA is very
passionate, smart people. Sometimes we
use tools that are old.
It's a, it's an enterprise
and it's hard to bring
in new tools in the
enterprise. For instance, what we
have is we're using things
like the approach of it.
I think that's important. And
I'll talk about the technology.
The approach of it is
not information technology. That's all
yesterday. It's about innovating together,
still it, but it's a
very different, it it's one
where you become prosumers producers
and consumers of it. So
we have so many end
users that are very smart
in it. They're double D
or triple D. They're very
good at what they do.
They're good at it. And
now with the whole cloud
and software as a service,
we also have to be
pseudo lawyers to understand the
license agreement and make sure
we don't get ourselves anybody
in trouble, but that innovating
together drives everything. So it's
that openness, both inside our
institution and also with the
public. This is my personal
opinion, but crowdsourcing is a
very, very big future for
us. You know, I've been
in the industry 20 plus
years. And the first half
of that, I had a
feeling of them versus us
in the sense of I
didn't work in it. I
was a consumer of it,
but they were very secretive
and very controlling and they
manage their servers. And, you
know, we were the dumb
users and they were it
as things innovate in the
future. I really like that
innovating together because it is
like a partnership. Whether it
be your partnership legal, you
can have an attitude that
they're there to say, no.
Or you can have an
attitude that they're there to
help you say, yes, what's
the path to, yes. It
seems like you feel that
it is working in that
way. Very much so. And
I think the, as we
look at the next it
decade, I'll give you a
couple of examples. So we
publish something that we call
the next 80 decade and
it's the next three years.
Cause there's a generation gap
between the freshmen and a
senior in college and it's
speeding up. So the next
it deck, the last it
decade for us the last
three years for seven trends,
seven is too much. It's
too complicated. So now it's
one trend, it's social, mobile
analytics cloud, and something we
call key disruptors. So smack.
And that part of that,
the enabler of all of
that is to see cloud
cloud computing made it possible
to do innovations much faster.
So we've been doing cloud
computing for about six years
now and we wanted to
get in the consumerism the
scale. And so Microsoft, Amazon
Google that type of scale
that they only worked with
the consumers. So we went
to our legal team and
said, how can we bring
these contracts in not to
negotiate every single end user
license agreement, but to bring
it in. So we can
have one contract that anybody
at JPL can use for
each of these vendors and
legals and it, and especially
procurement partnered up and draw
this innovation, whereas before it
was much more difficult to
do, and that can fast
forward where we're innovating together
all the time. Now. So
legal and procurement is kind
of an innovation enabler. And
when I talk across industry,
other industries, haven't quite gotten
there yet, but they're there
on their way. I don't
suppose that one can just
take the JPL visa card
and the JPL Hotmail account
and log into something like
Azure. Yes, you can essentially,
you can't say what the
good news about this. You
can't take your own credit
card or your own government
credit card and don't cause
it enabled by it, which
means that it's blessed by
it, which means you won't
get yourself in trouble or
the institution in trouble because
we only blessed the ones
that are safe, et cetera.
Cloud computing is a big
deal. I could talk about
that for hours and we
don't have hours, but the
key to us is we
use multiple clouds and we
use, we put the data
and the story, the storage
and the computing in the
appropriate place. I say, if
you're paying in the past,
we only had one place.
So if you put all
of your computation and storage
in the super secret safe,
then you're paying too much.
If it's just the cafeteria
menu. And if you put
everything where it's not specialty
secure, then you're not securing
your uplink commands and things
like that. So being able
to realize that there are
multiple appropriate places and they
have a model it's been
a real enabler. That's an
interesting philosophy. I realized that
every vendor wants one to
buy into their one vendor
world. And a Microsoft person
wants you to have an
Xbox and a windows phone
and a PC, but I
have a PlayStation and an
iPhone and a windows PC.
And cause that's my hybrid
life. Each one has a
different role in my life.
And then from an it
person's perspective, each cloud has
good things and bad things
about it. Yeah. If I
may give you two examples,
please. When Azure first came
out, we used, we partnered
up with somebody named Michelle
VRD at JPL, and she
had the vision of being
able to have games where
people could be citizen scientists.
So we created a website
called BIA Marshall and B
Marsh and was hosted in
Asher, was at Monash. It
was brand new and it
was very successful. So as
Asher is more people log
on, it could automatically scale
out without us having to
have computers inside. And that
lived on and we'll set
up. People could participate, identify
features on Mars that we
could then feed to the
scientists that could say 50,000
people think it's probably a
crime That we were exploring
tiles of pictures that you
had created. It was you,
you were fooling us into
doing crowdsourcing work, right? Oh,
you got it. So it's
very good for the taxpayer's
money. Cause it's a, it's
it engage the citizens. It
collects data, et cetera, with
Amazon. We've also done a
lot. Let me give you
one example, which was two
years ago, wonderful time, very
scary time. It was on
the web at seven minutes
of terror. It was actually
like for me, two years
of terror and we wanted
to share the public, shared
the pictures coming down from
ours. Maybe explain to a
moment for people who are
listening, who don't know what
the seven minutes of terrible,
Ah, it's a wonderful movie
created by the outreach side
at JPL. And you can
being able to Google it
and look for seven minutes
of terror. It's about a
five minute video that explains
in detail. What happens when
curiosity enters the atmosphere of
Mars and lands. It goes
from thousands of kilometers per
second to stand still in
seven minutes. And a lot
of innovations were made that
have never been done before.
So our piece in it
was how do we tell
the story? This is JPL
and NASA Superbowl. It's our
Olympics. It's our one chance
we used cloud computing. So
as the pictures came down
from Mars, we were able
to use saw them at
the same time as we
did Really. You didn't time
delay them. No. And at
the time, can you imagine
how many people we stream
150 terabytes in just a
few hours. We don't have
that type of capacity in
the side. That would be
too much, most of the
time and not enough that
day. So we were able
to do content distribution using
web services. So it's scaled
up automatically and we helped
along monitored it. And then
when it was done, it
scaled down. And so we
only paid for what we
used and it was a
really good experience. It's kind
of a classic cloud computing
scenario where we need it
for a while as a
burst and then we won't
need it. So why spend
the time building up right
where ourselves? And we noticed
that it was 10 times
the volume afterwards as it
had been before. So people
were interested. Of course, we
want to tell the story.
An interesting event happened six
months later, which was the
asteroid was coming close to
earth. And some clever person
wrote a game that you
could ride along the asteroid.
As it approached earth, it
went viral. People love that
logged on. And we didn't
know. All of a sudden
guy JPL is watching the
website start spiking, flipped it
over to the cloud infrastructure
name as an infrastructure. And
it handled it without a
blip. So nobody had a
blip and we just left
it there after that. So
external websites facing external, just
kind of make sense. Yeah.
Any other cloud stories and,
but it's the cost effectiveness
of it. It's the speed
to market. It's the return
on attention for us of
doing new experiments where a
customer user of it gets
interested. We prototype with them
very rapidly. Try it. If
it works, it can go
into be productized. And that
speed is really new for
us and exciting That term
that you just kind of,
it was a throwaway term,
but I want to dig
into that. You said return
on attention, right? Return on
attention. It's a term we
made up. That's a great
term. It's if you're doing
a prototype and if you're
doing something like cloud computing,
which was a prototype to
start, you will never get
return on investment. It's the
wrong thing to look for
because you won't get the
investment. Instead, if you get
the attention from an end
user, who's interested and you
do this rapid prototype experiment
on a real business problem,
and you do it together.
If you get two of
those ROA plus ROI equals
ROI, because then you will
get the investment. Then you
can measure it. Speed to
market is much more important
initially than a return on
investment. So that's just a
effectively, a formalization of Fail
fast. Yeah. Yeah. It is.
And fail. Failure is hard
in our world, but failing
in it is a, it's
a big deal. We had,
I had this epiphany, it
took three years. So I'm
not so bright. I was
getting frustrated because people were
saying, no, I can't do
that pilot. So why can't
you do the pilot? But
in their minds, pilot meant
if it works, it's going
to go into production. It's
a big deal in my
mind. It meant if it
works that we learned something.
So the right word is
prototype. Once we changed the
vocabulary and said, let's do
a prototype and we'll learn
something, it was much lighter
and easier and you don't
need to overly process prototype.
Right, Right, right. It says,
the deal for us prototypes
are effectively meant to fail.
Yeah. And pilots though, if
they fail it on, man,
that pilot, I poured my
heart into that thing. That's
right. It's not, it's a
different amount. So we kind
of, we have a process
ideation, prototype pilot production, and
between pro prototype and pilot
is a huge difference in
documentation and time and therefore
money. It's so funny that
all these years later, the
most important thing in computer
science is naming things correctly
because it just affects how
the users look at it.
It affects how the engineers
treat. It affects how management
deals with There's another term,
if I may throw out,
which is kind of fun
and it's eye catching, because
I agree with you. It's,
it's the moniker. It's we
have something we call the
it petting zoo. So what's
a petting zoo. It's where
you get to pet the
animals in it. Petting zoo
is where you get to
try the new technology, the
emerging technology that's coming in
that next it decade. And
we borrowed it to, I
heard a tune term from
Booz Allen Hamilton a long
time ago and we liked
it. So it stuck. And
a lot of the new
things in it first entered
through the it petting zoo.
And it's about the use
case. It's about somebody taking
this emerging technology, trying it.
And if it works in
our world, then we adopted.
If it doesn't, we write
down why it doesn't. So
when other people try it,
we can understand it. It
makes a lot of economical
sense and it's exciting. And
it's fun. And I have
many examples of things that
went through the pudding zoo
that we're not using. Then
they're fun. Those are, that's
a, that's a great term.
I'm going to have to
try to get that to
catch on at work. We
have a thing that's called
the garage that people use
to, if something came out
of the garage, if it
succeeds, that's great. We can
say, look, it's amazing. It
came out of the garage.
But if it, if it
was failed, you say, well,
it's just a little garage
project. It's just something fun
to try out. And it's
a kind of an ITP.
Yeah, yeah, no, actually your,
your arch is quite impressive.
And we're, we're about to
create makers, spec makerspaces, and
we're doing hackathons. We'll be
doing maker fairs. We do
a lot of open software.
We're now getting into understanding,
open hardware and playing with
it and trying it. And
that enters through the pairings.
Every time I mentioned Makerfair
to someone and they don't
know what it is, I
just kind of die a
little bit inside, but then
I get really excited because
I want to explain to
them how important it is
to go to a maker,
fair, to take their kids
to a maker. Fair. Are
you all looking to get
more involved in maker? Fair?
Oh, very much so. So
we do a hackathons, right?
Hackathons is software. So forgive
me. I'm going to get
my little definition. That needs
to be completely incorrect. No,
it's okay. But hacker fares,
hacker hackathons versus Makerfair versus
Mayfair hackathons. So for software,
there's this new movement that
software program or the future
is very different than the
program of the past. It's
about making the data available
and stringing it together very
quickly. And now we're experimenting
with wearable computing and wearable
computing has the ability to
change. Our labs has the
ability to change our conference
rooms and the fact that
you can be hands free
and command it with gestures
or voice Enables all kinds
of things. So all of
a sudden you're getting hardware
devices and with open hardware,
like we know raspberry PI,
you can afford it. So
now if you can take
the passion of software and
the passion of this new
hardware and put it together,
we can start creating things
that we couldn't afford to
do before. It's almost a,
it's a rapid, it doesn't
have to live forever or
had a huge investment. You
can just prototype, try it
fail quickly. And what I've
found is that when we
give these types of solutions
to the end user at
JPL, they innovate and create
things that we could never
dream of in it. Yeah.
It's, it's, it's funny that
you mentioned that this, this
is a bit of a
non-space related thing, but it
might be interesting to you
thinking about wearables and open
technology. I wear an insulin
pump and I have a
sensor that shows my blood
sugar. And this is a
sensor that's made by a
company that does not give
us their data has a
proprietary connector and proprietary this
and that. And the I've
been in the industry thinking
about managing blood sugar systems
for 20 plus years. We
not myself, but a group
created a hashtag and a
project called we are not
waiting. We diabetics. So I'm
not going to wait for
the FDA. I'm not gonna
wait for this company to
give me their data. So
we got the data out
of this device. We plugged
it into raspberry PIs and
Arduinos and Androids. We send
our blood sugar data up
into the cloud. Imagine how
long it would take for
us. If we had a
child with diabetes to wait
for this product to be
cloud enabled where I could
see my child's blood sugar
at school, I'm not going
to wait 10, 15 years
for that. The child will
be out of school. That's
right. So they did it
themselves. And they, they take
this device, this small, it
looks like an iPod nano.
They plug it into an
Android phone. They put it
in the child's backpack and
then dad or mom can
watch the child's blood sugar
and have a sense of,
of wellbeing. It's a, it
gives me goosebumps. It's fantastic.
It's amazing. It's yeah. And
it's plugging these, these Lego
pieces together in ways that
one I shouldn't have to
wait. I hope that the
companies of all kinds allow
us to do things like
yes, you're doing some cool
stuff with pebble. Yeah. Yes.
So wearable computing. Remember Jim
Rinaldi is the CEO of
JPL. And I saw the
iPhone coming and we get
really excited about the potential
for applications on the phone.
This was before they really
were open and all that.
And it happened now with
a wearable computing like pebble.
What we did is we
crowd some of that. When
I, for hackathon and wrote
some applications, fun applications. Like
you can see the latest
pictures from Mars on your
pebble. They come down because
curiosity landed on Mars. We
wanted you to see the
pictures. So we put the
pictures in the cloud. Now
the pictures were in the
cloud. We can now just
pull them down for any
device. So you can see
the latest pixel from Mars
on any mobile device, on
the pebble, in Google glass,
et cetera. Another one we
did was opals. Opals is
a project that is trying
to do optical communication to
space the differences. Right now,
we get all of our
data through a straw. The
straw is called radio frequency.
If you could do optical
calm, all of a sudden
you get a fire hose.
So you could do so
much more. So this was
an experiment put essentially a
laptop on the space station,
the space station streamed, a
high definition video down to
a receiving station on earth,
but do it through optical
con Like fiber optics without
the fiber fiber optic without
the fiber. So it's just
a laser mirror to mirror
like straight shot. Yep. But
the speed at which the
earth turns and the orbit,
I mean, if even a
geosynchronous orbit, there's going to
be jitter, how do you
see? You have to tune
it and you can do
fairly short, but still long
enough bursts. And the data
is so much faster. Really.
So height is, I was
always wondering, like, it's great
that we're landing on Mars,
but where's my 10 ADP
or four KB. Imagine high
definition video from Mars Four.
Okay. That's fantastic. It's coming.
And that was very successful.
And so the optical comm
was a fabulous thing and
they wanted to control synchronized
their watches. This was a
very young team, was part
of the early career hire
program that JPL does. Our
leader. Charles Elachi is an
amazing man. He had this
vision of getting excited, young
people in and they put
them a lot of them
to do this Opus project
across NASA. And so they
wanted to synchronize the watches
cause they had a hard
time finding app when the
laser firings were coming. So
we created what we call
an innovation vacation and innovation
vacation is a prototype where
somebody could do something they're
passionate about for a short
amount of time. Cause we
don't have that much money.
Like Google's 20% time that
they talk about it. That
was the purpose. Could we
do Google's 20% time now
we can't afford it. What
else could we do? Let's
do an innovation vacation. That's
cool. A guy named Rob
Witt off at JPL. And
I came up with that
term. So we found this
person who was passionate, wanting
to do something on pebble.
It's great. We have this
problem. We want to try
to figure it out. So
he did it person named
Dan Islam. And from, he
got a one week vacation
from his day job. His
management said, okay. And then
in one week he created
this app, but he created
it from first monocle. The
pebble pretty created on the
iPhone, the Android, the website
all in one week by
just being 100% focused. And
so we find it in
for a week to do
this probably work day and
night. Yeah. Well it's a
personal sprint. Why not run
as fast as you can
Learning this new technology. Everybody
loved it. And it was
very successful because all of
a sudden the people who
were doing this for mobile,
that they weren't tied to
the screen anymore. And there
was a very interested, we're
going to do more innovation
vacations. We're doing a lot
more with a pebble. The
fact that you can control
devices being hands free. And
now we're also doing a
lot with Google glass, which
makes you hands-free completely. So
it's the use case in
our clean rooms. For instance,
it's important to be able
to be hands free. And
especially if you have gloves
on, Are you doing anything
with connect or with the,
Oh yeah. So a natural
user interface new week and
ops lab at JPL is
doing a lot with it.
So we're partnering, we kind
of use the pairings of
approach and they take it
farther. Like I said, if
you give something in the
hands of an end user
at JPL, you'll get amazing
results. So JPL and Microsoft
had a partner early on
with Microsoft connect. And today
we're doing things like being
able to zoom model in
3d by using your Chester's,
just put a Microsoft connect
on there. We're controlling robot
arms remotely by tracking your
hand movements. And if you
can do that, maybe you
could do it on the
moon or in Mars. So
this is a pretty big
deal across NASA. Now the
whole wearable computing gestures and
it's the ground. The bottom
line is we're using gaming
technology, right? That you can
buy in the store. So
the consumer electronics is changing
so quickly that all we
really need to do is
stay in the forefront and
try to figure out what's
coming. And if it has
any application to us, how
do you know if it
has application, you put in
the petting zoo, you let
people try it out or
passionate end users and they'll
figure out if this application,
but another buzzword, if you
will, is today's toy is
tomorrow's tool. Yeah. And that's
it. It's very true is
sometimes a CTO. I call
myself chief toy officer. The,
I know that you're into
interested in Google glass, but
I think that the Oculus
rift with 10 ADP or
4k that close to your
eyes combined with some interesting
Kickstarters, like there was one
that was called an Omni.
I'm going to get the
name wrong, but I'll put
it in the show notes.
It was like an Omni
box. And basically imagine the,
the kinds of disks that
kids use to slide down
a slope on a sled.
It's a round disc. That's
concave. You put it under
your feet and you have
a, a belt on and
you can actually walk pushing
on this disc with an
Oculus rift plus a connect
to know where your hands
are. That means I'm walking
on Mars, from my perspective,
It's fabulous. One of, so
we're looking at all the
use cases so we can
already, and it should be
live in Google glass. Now
you can walk on, you
can be on Mars and
turn around and you'll see
it in three D when
you do the same thing
in Oculus rift, you are
completely immersed. And a person
Jeff Norris team at JPL did
a lot of development with
document Oculus riff so that
you are completely immersed. And
that's now you can do
tell operations tie that the
movement. And we also use
the leap to follow your
hand movements more closely. So
you tie all of those
things together and you now
have an amazing experience where
you're on Mars and you're
picking up a rock and
it's translating to movements where
the robot is actually picking
up a rock. So as
a consumer of the information
that's being provided to me
via JPL and NASA, I
can do this Oculus rift,
Google glass things today, but
put me in the mission
control person or the scientist
who is, are there scientists
working in, in this industry
who are going to put
an Oculus rift on and
look around and like do
that? Are they sitting in
front of a computer with
a mouse exploring? Like, I
think that rock is important.
It's something we're studying carefully.
Now. How can you drive
time on Mars? It's expensive.
It's not like there's a
rush hour, but you only
have so much time. So
could we be more precise?
So there's a lot of
research trying to figure out
how can we make more
accurate decisions? All of the
Rover can drive itself and
it's automated. We try to
plan the drive. So there's
a lot of happiness. Your
question is very well put.
So stay tuned. I think
they will invent something Just
I'm interested in. If perhaps
the consumer myself has more
fun toys than the scientists
trying to solve these problems.
It's certainly been true in
the past. And we want
to bring those toys into
the scientists. They can use
them. Three D printing is
a good example. A three
D printing is really coming
of age in that it
petting, I'm sorry. In the
three, the it decade, the
three years, six years ago,
I stupidly predicted that three
D printing was a big
deal. Nobody cared really. I
thought it would come down
from a hundred thousand dollars
to $10,000. That's such a
price drop that it will
surely take off it. Didn't
now we predicted again and
now three D printing is
really taking off. Yeah, because
he went from roughly 10,000
to $1,000. We could now
buy several three D printers
put in the petting zoo
and people experiment. We found
that it reduced the cycle
time from months to hours
where the scientists and engineers
can print out. They can
design models, print them, try
them, even if it's in
plastic, learn, print more learn.
And eventually, which is much,
much faster than before we
can then three D printed
on an expensive three D
printer that either we or
somebody else have, or we
can manufacture it the traditional
way. And it's remarkable. Three
D printing is, we're now
experimenting with, could we three
D print on Mars? Right?
So send something over there
that was raw, the raw
equipment and say, we need
a little bit different part
for this. Or the robot
is too small. Let's make
it an arm attachment or
exactly whatever, like an anteater's
nose to go into a
particular Location, or imagine that
you could send the three
D printer. And of course
there's radiation on Mars. So
you need to build a
hut. Three D printer could
take the regolith of Mars,
essentially the soil and make
bricks and stack up bricks.
We couldn't afford to transport
all those bricks up there.
You know, it's funny. I
just watched this really horrible,
horrible movie called transcendence with
Johnny Depp. And it was
just awful, you know, I
mean becomes omnipotent and everything.
But what was interesting about
it that they, he had
developed nanotechnology and started taking
the dirt itself to create
solar panels to power himself.
And, but the idea was
that the there's all this
Silicon in the it's, you
know, there's, there's this equipment
like there's this raw material
let's just shorten the distance
between, I need solar panels
and there's some dirt here.
Any basically would, you know,
it would look like dust
and then the nano mites
would turn into something. That's
what you basically just described.
You've got all this desk
dust. That's, that's a small
little robot. There's certainly enough
dust on Mars. The, the
other thing about the three
D printing is materials. I
think that's where the next
revolution will come. You can
now, so let's say you
need to make plastic and
metal. That's going to be
very weak. Indeed. What if
you could print something that
is gradually, it's a plastic
and turns into metal. Oh,
because at the, at the,
not the molecular level, but
at the micro micron level,
it is intermingled. Yes. Cause
you can three D print
metal. You can three D
print kinds of a plastic,
one or two at the
same time. It, it it's,
it makes my head hurt.
When I think about all
the possibilities, for example, the
solid structure is expensive, but
if you three D print
it, you can print it
as a lattice work works.
And that's just as strong.
A honeycomb is as strong
as a solid, but it
doesn't weigh nearly as much,
right. A fraction of the
amount. There's a little startup
out of LA called AI
robotics. That's working on an
all in one, three D
printer copier, a scanner and
fax machine. So imagine if
you could fax a spare
part up to the space
shuttle or to Antarctica, right.
And for the price of
this machine is probably about,
I'm guessing $2,500 or something
like that. Right. But it's,
it's really, it's an amazing
future. And so far we're
really talking plastics, but once
you start talking different materials,
could we print the spare
wheel on a Rover on
Mars? That's fantastic. It's really,
it's, it's quite fun. Well,
thank you so much for
chatting with me today, sir.
Can I get one last
plug? No, please do The
open data, open data. And
so big data is a
big deal. So the next
it decade is social mobile
analytics cloud, and key disruptors.
The analytics is the actionable
part. Big data. Big data
is over-hyped. Analytics is not.
So analytics means we'll need
data scientists who can tell
a story. So the educational
system should prepare them for
being tinkerers that can visualize
data quickly and tell a
story. And our mantra right
now is to when we
do new missions. And we're
thinking about it is to
think data first, think about
how the data will be
reused. So we have the
cloud so we can store
data and we can access
it. And we can do
lots of computing on it,
but we have to think
about how we would reuse
it. And now everything is
data. We worked with Microsoft,
for example, to be able
to take the videos we
produce in JPL tube. It's
like a YouTube, but it's
inside our firewalls and be
able to automatically transcribe them,
use something called Mavis, Microsoft
audio, visual information, indexing service.
And it's fabulous because now
you can search all thousands
of videos in a fraction
of a second. And it
comes back with the words
that people spoke. You don't
need the metadata because it's
created automatically. And so now
you can reuse lessons, learn.
You can do all that.
And then we realized once
we have that, the videos
are not data. You can
do analysis on them. You
can search for the words
that are our engineering videos,
different than safety videos, et
cetera, et cetera. So everything
has become data. It's an
amazingly world. So thinking data
first will hopefully drive us
to even more exciting missions.
Some of the, of the
visualization technology that's been available,
like with  J S
yes, we use a lot
it's it's mindblowing. And I
still struggle to create D
three JS, you know, quality
visualizations that are as good
as those that Mike Bostic
and the people who know
how to use D three
JS, but it feels like
Edward Tufte, he's kind of,
you know, his, his, his
predictions are coming true now.
Yeah, he sure was ahead
of his time. He's a
hero. And I tie that
to three D printing. Imagine
that we could three D
print the orbits, it took
to get to Mars, tying
the data to now being
able to visualize it and
share it, hand it around,
You know, how in all
of the movies that are
about space, there's some big
round disc that all of
the important captains get around.
And then they have like
a hologram topography of whatever
mission we're trying to do.
Every great scifi show has
that visualization, visualizing disk. And
I don't know if there's
enough if of holograms will
ever truly happen, but I
saw something recently. I think
it was MIT's media lab,
but you know, those grids
of nails that kids can
buy where you put your
hand underneath the nails and
then the nails pop up
and you basically see a
nail projection of your hand.
The, the MIT media people
basically had a table full
of those nails, and they
could not three D print,
but instantly visualize a topography
or something that was happening.
It would be amazing if
you had that optical connection
to Mars and the moon
Rover is moving. We would
actually see the topography of
what was happening in real
time. Physically, not a three
D representation as we would
see it on a screen,
but that, that topography at
a table level. I agree.
And it's about that emotional
connection with the data, the
visceral sense of the data.
Yes. And because for us,
the three D printing the
visualization, all that means the
scientists and engineers have a
much better discussion and with
it, so we can take
fewer missteps. So it's about
being able to visualize where
we want to go, but
then also be able to
take the prototype steps rapidly,
rapidly to get there. It's
never been a better time
to be in it. It's
every, day's a new adventure.
Well, this has been an
absolute joy, and I'm afraid
I could talk to you
for hours, but our time
is up. Maybe you'll come
on the show again. Some
time I would love to
thank you very much, Scott.
Thank you so much, Tom
Soderstrom from JPL. And this
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes. We'll see you
again next week. .